good afternoon and welcome to today's
Downing Street press conference and
pleased to be joined today by dr. Jenny
Harris before I talk about the latest
steps were taking to defeat the corona
virus let me update you on the latest
information from the Cobra data file I
can report through the government's
monitoring and testing program that as
of today 6600 and 12,000 and 31 tests
for corona virus have now been carried
out in the UK including 28,000 532 tests
yesterday 143 thousand 464 people have
tested positive that's an increase of
five thousand three hundred and eighty
six cases since yesterday 17,000 of 49
people are currently in hospital with
corona virus in the UK that's down from
17,000 615 the day before and down 10
percent on the same day last week and
sadly of those in hospital with the
virus 19,000 506 have now a died that's
an increase of 684 fatalities since
yesterday we express our condolences to
their families their friends and must
not forget that each of these statistics
represents a personal tragedy despite
the continued challenges ahead as we
prepare for the next stage in our battle
to beat this pandemic there are
tentative signs we are making progress
the main reason is the way Britain has
responded to the guidance to stay at
home and maintain social distancing over
the past few weeks by respecting these
measures the whole country is slowing
the spread of the virus by avoiding
public transport we're freeing up space
for critical workers who rely on buses
and trains to travel safely the
continued cooperation of both passenger
operations of both passenger and freight
Sport is critically important to our
resilience as a country so today I'm
announcing a new package of measures to
ensure transport boosts our national
response to covert 19 first we're
announcing a far-reaching package to
safeguard the flow of essential goods
into and across our country I can
announce the government has secured a
trilateral agreement along with French
and Irish governments which commits our
nation's to keeping freight routes open
throughout this crisis bringing in
life-saving medicines food and many
other essential goods allowing us time
to meet the needs of our countries
during this difficult period operators
on many of these routes have been under
rising financial pressure due to falling
demand since many of them bring in
crucial goods like medicines raw
materials and chemicals to purify water
it is important to guarantee the
continuation of these services so we're
protecting ferry routes between Great
Britain and Northern Ireland with
funding of up to 17 million pounds we're
also taking action to secure services
around the United Kingdom including ten
and a half million for links to the Isle
of Wight and the Isles and the Scilly
Isles allowing critical Freight to
continues to support families to every
part of our country and we're making
sure that airings to Belfast and Derry
Londonderry in Northern Ireland will
continue so that these routes are
particularly important for critical
workers thanks to the measures I've
announced today we are also safeguarding
five ferry and to Eretz between Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and 26
different freight routes from Britain
and between Britain and France Belgium
Spain the Netherlands Denmark Germany
Norway and Sweden second we have
launched a transports Support Unit
dedicated to fighting this pandemic at
the beginning of the crisis we reduced
services like
rail buses while securing their
continuation to enable critical workers
could make their way on essential
journeys lower ridership Smee pnes we
have spare capacity which i have
directed to be used for logistical tasks
to fight this virus by making use of the
people and the resources of the
Department of Transport and its agencies
and arms-length bodies we've been able
to help NHS trusts and local resilience
groups fight this pandemic we now have
over eight and a half thousand
specialists volunteers from across the
transport sector and around nine
thousand vehicles which can support the
national effort this includes four
fixed-wing aircraft owned by the
maritime and Coastguard Agency one of
them are 737 helicopters ships and
trains together they will help move
emergency patients and medical supplies
deliver PPE to hospitals and distribute
food parcels to vulnerable people
meanwhile vehicles from high weight in
highways England will act as mobile
kovat 19 testing centers Network Rail is
also making available its seven regional
distribution centers which can be used
to support that effort and this work is
now underway and I'd like to thank all
those taking part like the network rail
engineers who helped fit out the
nightingale hospital in Manchester this
country works hard to beat this virus it
is vital we come together and we help
each other so the transport Support Unit
is getting to work helping frontline
staff and making full use of the
significant resources at its disposal
I've also given the green light to
trials of drones to deliver medical
supplies earlier this year we awarded 28
million pounds to Southampton and
Portsmouth to deliver a future transport
zone as part of that initiative eight
million pounds was earmarked for testing
drones and how they might be used to
deliver goods in the years and decades
ahead of course now we have an urgent
need so we're making use of that testing
program
as part of our response to coded 19 as a
result I fast-tracked childs to begin
next week to carry medical supplies and
equipment so some Mary's Hospital near
Newport on the Isle of Wight finally
we've made funding available today to
keep England's trams operating this will
help in the fight it's a keeper light
rail networks in Greater Manchester
Sheffield Nottingham West Midlands and
Tyne we're operating allow us allowing
sensual essential local routes to remain
open and key workers to get to work
during this crisis all of these new
initiatives build on the very
considerable work we've seen across
Transport since this crisis began the
government's taken widespread action to
support the industry for example we
stepped in to keep trains running and to
keep the buses running we've worked with
the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and
Airlines bring thousands of Britons home
who has stuck abroad and as of today I
can also confirm that there are now no
British holidaymakers left stranded on
cruise ships anywhere in the world to
help motorists we've waived the MOT
renewals until the end of the outbreak
ensuring the vulnerable people are able
to stay at home without worrying about
their cars but I want to pay particular
tribute to the transport critical
workers who've gone above and beyond to
keep vital freight and passenger
services running to keep hospitals and
chemists supplied a medical with medical
goods to ensure supermarkets are stocked
with fresh food and to maintain
deliveries of essential energy and food
supplies from hauliers and train drivers
to those keeping our ports and airports
open each and every one of us depends on
the transport lifeline that they provide
and they of course are part of an army
of critical workers helping to fight
this terrible scourge but for before we
can consider if it's safe to amend these
restrictions we must first satisfy we
have met the first the five tests set
out by the first
secretary to ensure that the NHS can
continue to cope that the daily death
rates fall sustainably and consistently
that the rate of infection is falling
the operational challenges have been met
and most importantly that there is no
risk of a second peak now we don't know
yet when that day will come but I do
know that that date will arrive sooner
if motorists and others continue to only
make essential journeys the actions I've
announced today will ensure that the
transport can continue to serve the
nation during this crisis keep us
supplied with everything we need to stay
at home yet also ensure that
infrastructure required to emerge from
this pandemic stand ready to serve us
all when that time does arrive I'd like
to turn to dr. Jenn Harris thank you and
so just to evidence how hard I think
we've all been working and the results
of that work in relation to the five key
criteria that we're trying to achieve we
have some familiar sites here and to
note obviously on the first one this is
highlighting the change in our transport
use it was right down to 59 percent
lower than the first week of February it
has risen a little bit just two or three
percent in the last week and I would
like to just reinforce how important it
is that we retain that success in
reducing the amount of contacts that
we're having in our traveling which we
know has contributed significantly to
supporting the change in transmission of
disease next slide please
so the next slide shows the numbers of
cases reported these are when lab tests
are completed that sometimes a few days
after the test itself and there are two
colors on here and what you'll notice as
we go through the slides is firstly
obviously that the total number of cases
has risen it represents an epidemic
curve of a type but there is fluctuation
relating to the reporting
of the tests but importantly the curve
is flattening which I think indicates
the reduction in cases and transmissions
but just with the little caveat as we go
forward with the increased numbers of
tests available and that's particularly
in pillar two that's the orange color on
the side we will expect to see in some
ways an increase in cases because we're
having an increase in detection numbers
so this is a good signal we are
flattening that curve it rose sharply
and it's leveled off but don't be
surprised if cases do increase a bit as
our actual testing increases as well
next slide please
so this slide demonstrates the people in
hospital with confirmed Kovac 19 and
this has fallen obviously very markedly
in London we can see how hard the NHS
was working particularly in the first
week in April and the successes that's
had and in fact I think on the number of
inpatients who've been diagnosed with
kovat in the last 24 hours for the first
time in many many weeks this has fallen
below a thousand so this is real success
and many other success stories as you
can see with many areas working really
hard but we do need to keep our social
distancing measures going we must not
allow those pits to start curving
upwards again next slide please
and again a critical care red use we can
see a sharp rise I know there were
concerns in members of the public about
whether our capacity would be sufficient
it has always been sufficient and
increasingly on a day to day basis as we
manage the disease and the epidemic in
the UK that the numbers of beds
available has significantly risen so
there is no a lot of hard work of course
on the frontline and we mustn't
underestimate that by NHS colleagues but
capacity is continuing to increase as we
move forward
next slide please
and then sadly of course we report the
deaths which happen
these are deaths which are confirmed in
hospital they're not reported until all
the paperwork is cleared so again you
will see some variation in the reporting
but generally an increase in deaths as
the epidemic spread and then very
gradually but subtly an overall decline
a trend in downward death data next
slide please
and then finally this tries to give an
indication it's very difficult because
of the difficult comparisons of death
data between countries but to indicate
how the UK is doing in relation to other
parts of the world the far right blue
deaths align which you can see marked as
UK hospitals only indicates the the data
that we've just seen on the preceding
side and then increasingly we are trying
to provide a much broader indication to
ensure that we're capturing deaths which
are not just in hospital but that we
know will be happening in communities to
make sure that we're clear how how we
are managing the disease and to make
sure that we are looking after those who
are most vulnerable thank you thank you
very much Jenny I'd like to turn now to
cue pin the BBC q thank you
online booking for virus testing is
clearly proved very popular thousands of
workers got the slots they wanted or
managed to book kits others may well
have been disappointed what assurances
can you give about future demand being
met and how much will capacity go up
over the next few days Hugh thanks very
much I can tell you actually that there
were reports to the website have crashed
which it hadn't it was simply that the
slots for today were taken up we've seen
haven't we in the last few days this
difference between the capacity
available I think the last figure I saw
was 51,000 and the number of tests done
28,000 yesterday and how important it is
to make sure we're using that
capacity people being able to book
online directly that's all the critical
workers point ten point seven two
million people with their families are
those who are available now to use that
site I can tell you also that 16,000 of
those were booked during the first
period of that being online and the site
is actually being brought back up around
now for more people to go and book sites
that will then that closed off again
more sites will become more tests will
become available tomorrow and so on so
the answer is as we heard from Professor
Newton standing here yesterday
it looks like the trajectory to a
hundred thousand and tests by the end of
April that's going to be met in terms of
capacity I would say after the
experience today it looks like the
demand is there and if those two things
come together of course then we will
have that one hundred thousand tests per
day ambition met so that's the status of
the situation one more thing to add is
that we have heard from the devolved
administration's who also now wants to
join in using that online booking system
as well did you want to come back you
know just to say obviously you don't
want people's expectations to be
disappointed just to sum up are you
pretty confident that you can meet the
demand that is out there certainly the
next week or so I think it's fair to say
that no one of course quite knows but we
know what the capacity is we don't quite
know how many people would want to be
tested because you know many people
working for the NHS for example will
have already accessed those tests
through their workplaces this is now a
much wider number of people key workers
critical workers including for example
the Transport Workers that I was talking
about in my comments and we don't know
the answer to how many that will be I do
know and it is worth stressing to people
when they go to that site that this is a
test which will only test if you
currently have coronavirus so there's no
point to go on there and test to see if
you had it three weeks ago it's not
going to give you the answer to that
question so it's a current day and thing
we'll see how it
settles down but we're encouraged by the
16,000 bookings online indeed 46,000
people went to the portal first thing
today there's some more slots opening up
right now as I'm speaking and I'll be
more slots tomorrow days after I don't
there's anything you wanted to add
general and may well cover it all thank
you very much Hugh I turned to Roger
Johnson BBC Northwest Roger Secretary of
State thank you very much last well in
the moment if I may about light rail
systems which he talked about talking
about social distancing the Sun has been
shining in the northwest as in a lot of
places for a couple of weeks now it's in
this part of the world isn't
achievements I had a conversation today
with a lady called Joe whose sister was
a health care worker who worked in a
hospital in South Manchester she died of
code 19 it was her funeral today she was
in tears on the phone when I spoke to
her when she talked about the number of
people who were out on the streets as
they drove back from the funeral not
practicing social distancing and I
wonder as the police horses here say
that is becoming an increasing problem
whether it is possible to manage
people's expectations about how much
longer the lockdown will go on and
perhaps if necessary to encourage the
police rather than to police by consent
to go back to a different way of
policing as they did at the beginning I
wonder what your thoughts were look I
think overall I mean you know it's
tragic to hear stories like that and I
think overall the country's done
incredibly well in adhering so social
distancing and there is a danger as we
go into yet another warm sunny weekend
that people think that perhaps these
graphs are showing that you know the the
peak is over and but has Jenny was very
clearly showing and I'll ask her to
comment in the moment it isn't over
we're riding perhaps er I we hope a
downward trend but is by no means by no
means established yet and when people
ask me you know when will the measures
the social distancing the stay-at-home
measures be altered my answer in some
ways is some of this lies in your own
hands the more we adhere to it
and are strict about the social
distancing that's required but faster
that decision will be able to be made
but that decision recourse will be made
entirely on the advice of science and
medical advice genican 8:30 yes so I
think I mean the story you provide is
often a very powerful one people who
have lost relatives or loved ones or
colleagues at work really feel when they
see people floating the social
distancing requirements and it is
absolutely critical that we maintain
them it does of course demonstrate why
although this is a very science led
approach that science includes
behavioral science and right at the
start of the advice that was given there
was a considerable amount of debate and
discussion and evidence looked at
relating to how people comply with
social distancing and these are very
difficult things to get the balance
right on the whole as we've just seen
the whole most of the public art really
complying or really supporting that
becomes increasingly difficult as we go
through but actually just pretending
that we can jump out of it easily is not
the answer at all we will lose all the
benefit of the hard work that we've done
if we lift that so I think absolutely we
need to encourage everybody to comply
and perhaps just keep explaining we
perhaps sound a little monotonous
sometimes but really important so even
the basic things that we started with
washing hands frequently when you've
been out when you come in before you
have your food and keeping two metres
away from other people are absolutely
critical and Roger you mentioned you
want to come in on light rail as well I
think yes thank you very much it's just
a quick question view really a 95
percent down passenger numbers on the
Manchester Metrolink and Andy Burnham
the Greater Manchester mayor said it was
within days of having to be mothball but
clearly it's crucial for key workers to
get to work so therefore government
support to keep it running is welcome I
just wondered how soon that money will
come through and what form it will take
so I've been in contact with Andy
Burnham and other mayor's in the last
few days and D throughout throughout the
whole of this crisis and we are
absolutely
agree that support is required and in
this package today which is which would
be substantial assistance will be
provided I think it's fair to say though
we're not looking to try to run services
as you say 95 percent of people aren't
travelling we're not looking to run the
full service was this is ongoing but
it's very important that are available
not least to get those critical workers
to the NHS and and around as discussed
so we're pretty much there on load I'll
be speaking to the mayors and others
this coming weekend about it as well
thank you very much indeed can I turn to
heather edwards ITB meridian good
afternoon to the Secretary of State
please you've just announced this ten
and a half million pounds of government
money to keep these essential ferry
services running between the mainland
and the Isle of Wight and the Isles of
Scilly
but we do know of other ferry companies
that are struggling because of this
lockdown notably at the Port of Dover
here no ferries says it urgently needs
150 million pounds of government money
if it's going to stay afloat of course
they're currently bringing in food and
medicines to the UK well they also
government funding and secondly if I
could just say we believe about 15,000
people a day are still flying into UK
airports from overseas
none are being checked for kovat we now
have the chief executive of Heathrow
Airport personally appealing to you and
the health secretary to screen
passengers as they come in why is this
currently not being done thanks very
much Heather I referred in my speech to
a trilateral agreement that we've
reached with the French and the Republic
of Ireland government which is about
that critical freight flow to which you
refer piano Stennett and others and in
my remarks I also made reference to 26
different freight routes from Britain
France Belgium many other countries I
won't repeat the list which have been
secured as well that is in addition to
those freight services and transport
services which have been secured to
places like the Isle of Wight and also
the links from Great Britain to Northern
Ireland so all of those things are
included in the package
and we'll ensure that a minimum level of
service is provided that some people can
go to the shops and be confident that
the goods are back on the shelves and
remain there as they are now throughout
the rest of this crisis look with
regards to flights it is the case that
of course people have been able to fly
here the numbers are down massively and
there's probably only four or five
percent of the flights that were taking
place before this crisis and the load
factors are very low quite a lot of the
people returning at one point three
million of them I think so far have been
British nationals abroad who wouldn't
have been able to come back had it not
been for those flights the requirements
for anyone coming to this country at the
moment are to stay in one place and not
leave for any reason so as we come out
of or any of the reasons outside of the
fourth stated as we come out of this and
into the next phase at a future point we
will continue to keep the excellent
medical scientific advice we receive
under review to say whether those
procedures at airports should change but
I do just want to make this point
countries that lock down the flights and
thinking for example in the United
States who prevented Brits from flying
there or Europeans from flying there
other countries have not necessarily
weather the storm of the coronavirus any
better and many of them have seen much
higher levels of deaths so although it
should and must be part of the plan
going forward I think it's probably more
useful during the phase of test track
and trace that the health secretary was
talking about yesterday Jenny I think
that's very happy I mean this country
and many others learned a lot actually
from the West African Ebola outbreak and
there's been considerable discussion
since then and there are periods when
elements of screening and I use that
word advisedly because it means very
different things to different people can
be very reassuring to the public and can
be helpful so for example if you have a
country which has a very high rate of a
of an illness like Ebola an exit
screening program to prevent people
leaving the area
dispersing across the world can be
helpful and certainly early in this
particular pandemic of course you'll be
aware that we very closely quarantined
people for example coming back from
Wuhan and the very high-risk areas once
the prevalence of disease balances if
you like across the world that becomes a
less effective mechanism and and as the
minister said what would what may well
become an opportunity is when our rates
are very tightly controlled and
individuals are coming into the country
even then it's not quite as simple so I
think often an average traveler will be
very reassured with a sort of
thermometer scanning gun but if I said
to you if you look at the detail of
those that the variation in reliability
of their temperature control and
recording can be 2 or 3 degrees plus or
minus and it may depend on the ambient
temperature or even the color around
that scanning unit you can see that it's
quite problematic in saying whether an
individual should be pulled in or out
for screening equally people can often
we're relying on them often to provide
their own story and I think the most
critical point is when somebody comes
through a port of entry they maybe
they're going through two or three
minutes an incubation period for this
disease I think runs into about 21 and a
half thousand minutes so the likelihood
of sort of grabbing somebody at that
point is quite small but there are
important considerations for doing that
and I know that government economies are
showing symptoms a corona virus test you
accept that you raised expectations way
beyond anything you can deliver consider
a 5,000 home testing kits and 15,000
drive-through appointments you regret
raising expectations as high as you have
and given that right now and the
government website there's no
eligibility tests to prove that you're a
key word your effect and trusting anyone
that goes in that website to book an
appointment for a test or book at home
kit without any checks on who they
actually are will you at some point
consider changing that bringing in
checks if the numbers continue to be so
high um
we'll always keep this under a reviewing
particularly the operation of that that
website but I think it is true to say
that it's although although there are as
you say ten million or ten point seven
two million is the actual figure key
workers and families or households I
should say more accurately who are
eligible as I stressed before there's
actually no point taking a test I think
from a medical point of view I defer to
Jenny on this unless you think you have
some symptoms unless you have a reason
to be taking it and particularly no
point in in taking a test if you already
had it three weeks ago or you suspected
you you did you you you've probably
missed the boat I think but look in
terms of expectation management and the
rest of it the health secretary stood it
made a very clear pledge at the
beginning of the month a lot of people
thought it would be difficult to achieve
to get to a hundred thousand we can see
capacity has been rising very fast then
people quite rightly said well what
about the demand for these tests you're
not just getting through enough of them
the fact that people now want those
tests now we've made it much easier to
obtain them I think is a good thing and
I think it's it's helpful and we will
have to see in the coming days how we
balance that demand with the available
with the availability of tests but I
think I'm right in saying that everyone
would welcome us getting to the hundred
thousand figure and it would be very
good to see that demand match with the
capacity which has increasingly been
coming available Jenny yes I just wanted
to reinforce the the point that you made
about the this is the have you got it
now test and it will be a wasted test if
people track online take one of those
test cert and that to find it's a
negative what we really want to do is
encourage those who have symptoms to
take the tests or where somebody in
their family does
and if those do prove negative with a
certain number of caveats which are
outlined then it does mean that those
people can be back at work and their
families can be out circulating within
the social distancing rules as normal so
it is important that the public use of
these tests in the way that they were
intend
because that will benefit all of us but
particularly our frontline services dan
you look like you might want to come
back well I need to say that we're
talking here about key workers many of
whom do shift work so if you're opening
the website up at 8 o'clock in the
morning many of them can sit at home and
their computers in refresh what they're
trying to buy tickets for a festival
it's not that simple so is there a
system you can come up with that means
that there isn't this rush every single
morning to these people who aren't
necessarily going to be at home able to
do that yeah we look actually I think
one of things I should mention is
yesterday one of the slide shows there
were 27 drive-thru sites I can tell you
today there are now 31 original
drive-thru sites so we're making it
easier by having more of these for
people to be able to get to them quicker
I think by the end of next week I think
it is we're aiming to increase that
number quite a lot again so the by think
248 I think the the point is we want to
make it as easy as possible we do have a
smaller number at the moment but it's in
trial as it were of home tests and
picked up by courier afterwards to be
tested and hopefully we'll be able to
expand that program as well but I think
that if by the end of next week at the
end of the month
we've got somewhere near that that goal
of of a hundred thousand I think in
comparative terms internationally that's
actually a very high number and Jamie
may have more just wanted to point out a
sort of very obvious clinical feature
which is I recognize there's a challenge
about the process but of course if you
are symptomatic and you're a critical
worker you should not be at work you
should be at home you may not feel quite
well enough to be hitting a button on a
computer but please do not be at work if
you're symptomatic and needing a test
that's a very good point of course you
shouldn't be there in the first place
that's that's true but look I think you
know I don't we have to sort of be
sensible about this everybody recognizes
this is building a test system from
scratch everyone knows it's enormous
challenge and I think the the NHS many
of the outside organizations who've been
involved in this
have really been rising to the challenge
and it looks like meeting those numbers
will be possible and hopefully balancing
both the demand and the capacity for
those tests as well in the coming days
thank you very much down can I turn to
Annabel Dickson the Politico Thank You
Secretary of State our first question
for you and the latest round of brexit
talks finished today with both sides
admitting that limited progress was made
senior figures in a key sector for your
department the haulage sector overlooked
the corona virus outbreak means they're
simply not in a position to give the
complexity of future trade arrangements
with the EU the necessary focus and they
believe the transition period should be
extended are they wrong and a question
for dr. Harry's as well and we saw today
the huge demand for home testing kits
from key workers who are now able to
apply anyone who's watched a corona
virus has been administered can fears
not a simple task are you confident that
these tests will be reliable and do you
know what the failure rate is for these
self-administered tests Annabel thank
you very much I'll take the first point
about the brexit talks and people may
not be aware that these have been
continuing during this period and they
take place via video and as you rightly
say the latest round has just taken
place what actually included some very
good progress on some areas for example
energy transport civil nutri all made
significant progress and transport is
one of the areas where actually there
isn't necessarily so quite so much
distance between us but look it is true
to say and you will have heard all this
before you know this country not only
voted to leave the EU though I actually
didn't in that referendum but the
country nonetheless did but we've also
had a general election since which a lot
of people voted for the manifesto saying
that this is exactly
going to do and that we weren't going to
end and entertain an extension to the
transition period and that remains the
case that we think the best way of
providing certainty to all businesses
out there is to know that we're not
going to keep chopping and changing that
the transition period will end at the
end of the year to carry on these
negotiations with the EU in good faith
along with negotiations negotiations
with other countries in the world and at
least then to be able to provide the
certainty and I keep very close contact
with the haulage industry who as you
rightly say right on the front line
during this crisis and as I described in
the freight package that I outlined
today to which the government is also
providing a significant assistance but
no we won't be extending to answer your
question and Jenny on demand so I think
the underlying question was around the
reliability of them and obviously tests
can fail if you like for a number of
reasons the test may not be sensitive
enough it may not be specific enough you
can have problems which we perhaps often
hear about in vaccinations for example
where things are not stored properly in
chains so it's quite difficult to
actually put try and put any sort of
number on the failure element I think
which is what you'll describe we have
potentially somebody taking the test
themselves but what I can assure you is
we have done in trying to impala ting
these tests run tests in parallel so
having a trained worker take a test and
then an individual who's not trained to
take them and actually they're
remarkably comparable for this we
wouldn't be launching something if it
wasn't I think having said that where we
have some other testing so for example
you will have heard about the ONS survey
that it's important we understand the
prevalence of disease we need to
extrapolate data from that make sure we
understand as far as we can what the
prevalence of diseases across the the
country where we want it to be
absolutely robust and we will try and
use exactly the same techniques and
trained individuals so they are directly
comparable and I think there are other
settings where it's I mean it's actually
can be quite an unpleasant thing to do
and it may not be very normal so for
example in a care home where it's really
important that we are looking after both
our care workers and our residents
there's likely to be additional training
there because it's we need to ensure
that those tests are taken appropriately
and we get good answers there is
actually a video that goes along like
alongside this program so people can see
how they should do it but we did try
that and it came out comparable that's
usually helpful to know Jenny thank you
bill do you want to come back on breaks
at all testing kids and yeah I just
wanted to come back on one more thing
many people in the UK will have seen the
clip overnight of the President of the
United States suggesting coronavirus
might be treated by injecting
disinfectant into the body do you have a
message to Donald Trump about the
dangers of spreading dangerous
disinformation when governments around
the world are trying to combat its
spread from other sources here I'll
defer to medical expertise generally and
so I wouldn't have a specific message to
Donald Trump I'd have a specific message
to anybody who suggested they should be
injecting anything into their bodies I
mean clearly we would not support from a
medical professional perspective it is
really important that people use
appropriate treatments that are
evidence-based and tested we have very
good programs that have been taken up
very rapidly coordinated in this country
testing various different alternative
treatments those trials will report
reasonably early but certainly nobody
should be injecting anything and we
should be using evidence-based and
properly trialed treatments that we know
will be safe perfectly clear thank you
very much indeed thank you Annabelle
John Walker from Birmingham live and the
Newcastle Chronicle scientist at MIT
raids again the issue of light rail
systems which as you'll know were
playing about role in major cities yeah
Tinky what is to work you've said that
the Department for Transport will
support them but I don't think you've
given any indication how much funding
they can expect say for example and tiny
way say they needed 10 million
and bailouts just to keep the Metro
running until July Manchester says their
Metrolink is losing millions of pounds a
month and transport for the West
Midlands says that their Metro is losing
at least a million pound a month we
could be forced Aquarius can you tell me
how much funding these regions can
expect and secondly if I'm a question
for Jenny Harris and do we know why
people from some ethnic minority
backgrounds seem to be dying in
disproportionately high numbers during
this this crisis or if we don't know at
this stage perhaps could you tell us
also the work is taking place to try to
find out thanks very much John and to
answer your question no I don't have the
actual figure for you and that's because
we're still in discussions with the
various different systems and also
discussing the level to which that they
should be continuing to provide service
and also other assistance that they're
able to access it this is a package
which runs into the millions it's not a
small endeavor to do this and I
mentioned the particular systems to
which it will apply more details soon
but I I also want to say that we heard
actually I think you know comment
earlier these systems are running way
below ordinary capacity and quite
rightly because people are following the
social distancing please don't go out
unless you need to instruction so it is
case of finding a route with them which
allows them to remain viable entities
but not continue to run exactly the same
service that they run at the moment but
we're actively in touch with them and I
think it's good news today that we've
announced there is going to be a
multi-million pound package to ensure
that those light rail systems which are
excellent in in all cases can continue
thank you so this is a hugely important
and hugely complex subject so you
actually may wish to stop me if I get
into full flow it's really important
when we look at disease prevalence and
severity and particularly who which
individuals are losing their lives we
always look at different characteristics
whether that be gender whether it be a
or in this case our focus is on black
and minority ethnic groups and trying to
untangle all of the different elements
that might indicate that there was a an
excess of severe disease and excess of
catching the disease in the first place
or even more importantly those people
who died from the disease is very
complex and if I just give a few
examples
number one our data has to be very very
good and even the recording of ethnicity
both by a country of origin for example
or an ethnic group which somebody feels
part of that is hugely complex so a
death certificate will give the country
of origin but that may well not give
anything to do with how the individual
has lived their lives or the communities
that they've lived in all the sorts of
exposures to disease that there may have
so there is a huge amount of work
ongoing on this as soon as there was an
issue potentially identified and I say
potentially because I think we need to
wait until we have very very clear data
there was a meeting of senior clinical
professionals and public health England
announced or it was announced a couple
of days ago public health England will
be doing a very detailed review into
this the sorts of things that need to be
looked at and I know will be it's not
just as simple as the ethnic position
but it will be things like for example
what are the conditions we know that
individuals from particular ethnic
backgrounds suffer from so hypertension
high blood pressure is something which
we know carries an increased risk of
severe disease and poor outcomes in
covered and that is also more prevalent
in some ethnic minorities so it's it's
actually untangling this I think the
other things though are there some very
important things it's not just the
underlying conditions it's also about
how people live their lives so this
disease will transmit more we're all
taking social distancing measures if
we're very close together so people who
live in close communities may well have
poorer outcomes they're all more likely
to transmit disease
and obviously also many of our black
minority ethnic groups are in different
elements of socioeconomic status and
that is a really important point that
also needs to be considered I think the
final point I just make is that actually
it's really important that we engage
with those communities to understand and
in this country we have very very high
representation in the NHS our huge
numbers of workers in the NHS and in a
frontline care services are from
minority ethnic groups and so we need to
work understand how they are represented
I know for example in health care in the
very sad vests and health workers it may
be that that is proportionate to the
very high benefit that they provide to
our health service in the sense they are
overrepresented I think it's about forty
five percent of doctors in the London
area for example are from minority
ethnic groups so very very complex all
of those things need to be considered
and they are under very active
consideration thank you very much indeed
Jenny oh I know it's also true to say
that something the public health England
are also looking into lastly can I turn
to Harrison Jones at the Metro please
thanks very much grant the Health
section promised a hundred thousand
tests will be carried out daily by the
end of the month before the goal post
was seemingly moved to talk about our
capacity for testing we hit less than
29,000 tests today when will we reach
the prime minister's previous target of
250,000 and how and when testing be open
up beyond key workers and their families
and if I may just an extra crack
question on contact tracing and then the
NHS out are we expecting to follow a
similar model to South Korea which
involves public's movements being
tracked by a mobile phone GPS thanks
very much Harrison so look on the
hundred thousand and this is the number
of tests versus the capacity and it's a
well-worn discussion I think what we've
been finding is the capacity has been
rising pretty fast as I mentioned
professor Newton just yesterday says
that he thinks we're going to get to
that
100,000 ambition by the end of the of
the month I think we can see that
because the additional testing
facilities are coming on la online and
these are sort of super labs and they're
starting to look at the automation of
those to make them even faster the
problem has been that there haven't been
sufficient people being tested coming
forward through the route which is quite
convoluted of course of somebody having
to go through their employer
perhaps the NHS or a care home in order
to take that test what we've seen today
is there is excess demand for tests out
there and I can therefore confidently
say adding the two figures that you
mentioned the 28,000 - attested
yesterday through the ordinary system
and the 16,000 or so that I mentioned
today the numbers are going to be rising
pretty sharply and quite fast so I think
that all backs what was said yesterday
that the number of tests as well as the
capacity so the tests as well look like
they are all headed in the right
direction and we look forward to seeing
that I think the Prime Minister
mentioned 250,000 as an ambition without
a particular timetable and the important
thing which leads into your second
question is why we're doing this and the
the contact testing tracing is
absolutely vital to it my understanding
of the technology is that the app uses a
sort of Bluetooth signal to completely
anonymously be able to check who's been
within a Bluetooth range and then use
that as part of the contact tracing
follow-up I think that's the correct
technical explanation on it Jenny may
have something throughout and I think
you want to come back in Harrison so I
just add a little bit to that so I think
the ambition as you as you say is to
digitalize some of this process to try
and support measures that can bring us
back out of some of the social
distancing restrictions clearly I'm sure
we only have to look at our own families
to think how many usually the younger
generation have got the right sort of
mobile phones and would be quite happily
working that way and as you work at the
years grandparents and things who
perhaps don't so having a see
model around track and trace is not
going to be possible
it will require a certain proportion of
us to be using those phones it will
require very rapid testing of the key
individual and very strict compliance of
all of those who are triggered if you
like you said you've been near somebody
who may have symptoms of corona virus to
take appropriate action so I think
there's quite a lot of work to keep
going on that and we are likely to have
some sort of hybrid response in order to
manage both the digital side and human
nature but exactly heading in the right
direction and obviously the testing in
that scenario will be really important
we heard yesterday about the 18,000
contact tracing people I think it's also
true to say you require quite high
take-up of the app to make it useful and
this will be another great national
effort required it will be an NHS app
and I know that how people feel about
supporting our NHS this will be a new
way to show support for it when that's
available and finally I'll just come
back to you Harrison all right sure just
on the 250,000 target Johnson talks
about a 25th March do you have a date
when that 250,000 targets can be reached
or is it just gonna stay as an ambition
I think was an ambition from the Prime
Minister and actually I think the fact
that we've been able to go from I recall
I think when the Health Secretary was
talking about this 7,000 tests a day
were being carried out on average each
day and it now looks likely you will get
certainly to the hundred thousand
capacity and quite like me to the
testing of a hundred thousand day a day
as well shows what we can achieve and I
do pay huge tribute to the many
different organisations have been
involved in getting us there not just
public health England but the the
private labs the universities and the
enormous scale up that's been required
to achieve something which you looked
like it very ambitious and deep was a
very very ambitious target Harrison
thank you very much indeed I just wanted
to finish by saying that we're often
asked about when this particular phase
can come to an end and in many ways they
are
to that I think lies in our own hands
this is gonna be another sunny weekend
we know that we've made a lot of great
gains that jenny has been explaining to
us in those graphs earlier flattening
the curve but it's absolutely essential
that we do not let that slip this
weekend and the message as ever
remains the same to stay home protect
the NHS and therefore save lives
thank you very much Andy thank you see
the headlines as they happen and watch
BBC news live in the app and get the
full story with BBC decoder UK forward
slash news follow the story for all the
latest with BBC News